Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
applied neurophysiology in anaesthesia. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the principles of neuromonitoring in anaesthesia.
During operations that put the nervous system at risk,
the function of the brain or spinal cord can be monitored to detect impending
injury in time to prevent it, and an understanding of the principles and main
modalities of neuromonitoring is important in neuro-anaesthesia and major surgery.
The aim is to detect, in time to act,
any compromise of the nervous tissue — from ischaemia,
compression or surgical injury — by monitoring its function or its perfusion.
Several modalities are used.
The electroencephalogram monitors the electrical activity of the cortex,
and detects cerebral ischaemia — which slows and then flattens the trace — used,
for instance, in carotid surgery.
The evoked potentials monitor the integrity of specific sensory or motor pathways,
by stimulating and recording the response transmitted through the pathway:
the somatosensory evoked potentials test the sensory pathways,
and the motor evoked potentials the motor pathways,
used in spinal and other surgery to detect injury to the cord;
a loss or change warns of compromise.
Monitors of cerebral oxygenation and perfusion — jugular venous oximetry,
near-infrared cerebral oximetry, and transcranial Doppler — detect inadequate
cerebral blood flow and oxygen delivery.
So neuromonitoring detects impending nervous-system injury in time to act:
the electroencephalogram detecting cortical ischaemia;
the evoked potentials testing the integrity of the sensory and motor pathways,
to detect injury to the cord in spinal surgery;
and the oxygenation and perfusion monitors detecting inadequate cerebral blood flow
— the principles and modalities of monitoring the nervous system at risk.
Describe the evoked potentials and their use.
The evoked potentials are a valuable form of neuromonitoring,
allowing the integrity of a specific neural pathway to be tested during surgery,
and an understanding of them follows from the physiology of the sensory and motor
pathways, so they are worth describing.
An evoked potential is the electrical response of the nervous system to a specific
stimulus, recorded as the signal is transmitted through a pathway;
by stimulating at one point and recording at another,
the integrity of the intervening pathway can be assessed.
The somatosensory evoked potentials are produced by stimulating a peripheral
sensory nerve and recording the response as it ascends through the somatosensory
pathway — the dorsal columns and on to the cortex;
they test the integrity of this sensory pathway, and are used, for example,
in spinal surgery, where a loss or deterioration of the signal warns of injury to
the cord.
The motor evoked potentials are produced by stimulating the motor cortex and
recording the response in the muscles,
testing the integrity of the motor pathway — the corticospinal tract;
they complement the sensory potentials,
since the two pathways lie in different parts of the cord and may be injured
separately.
The signals are affected by anaesthetic agents, which must be taken into account.
So the evoked potentials test the integrity of a neural pathway by stimulating at
one point and recording the transmitted response:
the somatosensory evoked potentials testing the ascending sensory pathway,
and the motor evoked potentials the descending motor pathway;
used in spinal and other surgery to detect injury to the cord,
with a loss warning of compromise, and influenced by anaesthetic agents —
monitoring following from the physiology of the pathways.
Describe the physiological principles of cerebral protection during anaesthesia.
Cerebral protection — reducing the risk of brain injury during periods of ischaemic
risk — is an important aim in neuro-anaesthesia and in conditions such as cardiac
arrest, and its principles follow directly from the physiology of cerebral blood
flow and metabolism, so they are worth drawing together.
The brain is vulnerable to ischaemia because of its high metabolic demand and lack
of reserve. Protection rests on two complementary strategies:
maintaining the supply of oxygen and substrate, and reducing the demand.
Maintaining supply means preserving an adequate cerebral perfusion pressure — by
supporting the arterial pressure and controlling the intracranial pressure — and an
adequate oxygenation and oxygen-carrying capacity,
and avoiding the factors that reduce cerebral blood flow.
Reducing demand means lowering the cerebral metabolic rate:
hypothermia is the most effective measure,
reducing both the functional and the basal metabolism and so increasing the brain's
tolerance of reduced flow; and anaesthetic agents that reduce the cerebral
metabolic rate, such as the barbiturates and propofol,
give some protection in focal ischaemia where residual flow remains.
Equally important is the avoidance of secondary insults — hypoxia, hypotension,
hypercapnia, hyperthermia, hypoglycaemia and hyperglycaemia,
and seizures — each of which worsens ischaemic injury.
So cerebral protection rests on maintaining the supply — adequate perfusion
pressure, oxygenation and carrying capacity — and reducing the demand — chiefly by
hypothermia, and to a limited extent by metabolic-suppressant anaesthetics in focal
ischaemia — together with the rigorous avoidance of secondary insults;
principles following directly from the physiology of cerebral flow and metabolism.
Describe the physiological considerations in the patient with a raised intracranial
pressure presenting for anaesthesia.
The patient with a raised intracranial pressure presents particular challenges for
anaesthesia, and the management of these follows directly from the physiology of
the intracranial pressure and the cerebral circulation,
so it is worth drawing together as an application.
The two governing aims are to avoid further raising the intracranial pressure,
and to maintain an adequate cerebral perfusion pressure and oxygenation.
The intracranial pressure is kept from rising by attention to the cerebral blood
volume and venous drainage: avoiding hypercapnia and hypoxia,
which cause cerebral vasodilatation, by careful control of ventilation;
positioning the patient head-up with the neck unobstructed to aid venous drainage;
preventing the surges in pressure that accompany coughing,
straining and laryngoscopy, by adequate anaesthesia and smooth technique;
and choosing anaesthetic agents that reduce, rather than increase,
the cerebral blood volume — favouring the intravenous agents that reduce the
cerebral metabolic rate and blood volume, and using the volatile agents,
with their direct vasodilator effect, cautiously.
The cerebral perfusion pressure is maintained by supporting the arterial pressure
and avoiding hypotension. Measures to reduce a raised intracranial pressure —
osmotic agents, cerebrospinal fluid drainage,
controlled ventilation — are used as needed.
So the patient with raised intracranial pressure is anaesthetised so as to avoid
further raising the pressure — controlling ventilation to avoid hypercapnia,
positioning head-up for venous drainage, preventing pressure surges,
and choosing agents that reduce cerebral blood volume — while maintaining the
cerebral perfusion pressure by supporting the arterial pressure;
the application of intracranial and cerebral-circulatory physiology to the patient
at risk.
Describe accidental awareness under general anaesthesia.
Accidental awareness under general anaesthesia — the unintended consciousness and
later recall of events during what should be general anaesthesia — is a serious
complication, and its understanding draws on the physiology of consciousness and
the conduct of anaesthesia, so it is worth discussing.
Awareness occurs when the depth of anaesthesia is, at some point,
insufficient to abolish consciousness,
so that the patient becomes aware of events during the procedure,
and may later recall them; the experience can be distressing and cause lasting
psychological harm, particularly if accompanied by pain or by the helplessness of
being unable to move because of neuromuscular blockade.
The risk is increased by factors that tend to lighten the anaesthesia:
the use of neuromuscular blockade, which removes the protective sign of movement
and the patient's ability to respond;
certain techniques and circumstances where the dose must be limited,
as in the haemodynamically unstable patient or in obstetric and cardiac
anaesthesia; and equipment failures in the delivery of the agent.
Its prevention rests on ensuring and confirming an adequate depth of anaesthesia:
giving adequate doses, monitoring the end-tidal anaesthetic concentration,
being alert to the clinical and autonomic signs of light anaesthesia,
using depth-of-anaesthesia monitors where appropriate,
and checking the delivery equipment.
So accidental awareness is the unintended consciousness and recall during general
anaesthesia, occurring when the depth is insufficient,
and made worse by accompanying pain and by the paralysis of neuromuscular blockade;
its risk increased by blockade and by circumstances limiting the dose,
and its prevention resting on ensuring and confirming adequate depth — by adequate
dosing, monitoring the agent concentration and the clinical signs,
and depth monitors — a serious complication understood through the physiology of
consciousness.
Describe the autonomic disturbances of relevance to anaesthesia.
Disorders and disturbances of the autonomic nervous system are important in
anaesthesia, because the autonomic system controls the cardiovascular and other
responses on which the stability of the anaesthetised patient depends,
so an awareness of the principal ones is worth having.
Several autonomic disturbances are relevant.
Autonomic neuropathy — damage to the autonomic nerves,
as commonly occurs in long-standing diabetes — impairs the autonomic reflexes,
so that the patient cannot mount the normal compensatory responses;
this causes cardiovascular instability under anaesthesia,
with an exaggerated fall in blood pressure and an impaired heart-rate response,
and other problems such as delayed gastric emptying and impaired temperature
control.
Autonomic dysreflexia is a dangerous condition occurring in patients with a high
spinal cord injury, in whom a stimulus below the level of the lesion — such as
bladder distension — triggers a massive,
uncontrolled sympathetic discharge below the lesion, causing severe hypertension,
with a reflex bradycardia, which can be dangerous and must be recognised and
treated.
The autonomic responses are also pharmacologically important:
many anaesthetic and other drugs act on the autonomic system or its receptors,
and the autonomic reflexes, such as the baroreflex, are depressed by anaesthesia,
contributing to cardiovascular instability.
So the autonomic disturbances relevant to anaesthesia include autonomic neuropathy
— as in diabetes — impairing the compensatory reflexes and causing cardiovascular
instability; autonomic dysreflexia in high spinal injury,
causing dangerous hypertension from uncontrolled sympathetic discharge;
and the depression of the autonomic reflexes by anaesthesia and the action of many
drugs on the system — disturbances important to the stability of the anaesthetised
patient.
Pull it together: how does neurophysiology underpin the practice of anaesthesia?
I would draw the neurophysiology module to a close around the theme that
anaesthesia is, in essence, applied neurophysiology — the deliberate manipulation
of the nervous system — so that its physiology underlies the whole of the specialty.
The central act of general anaesthesia is the reversible abolition of
consciousness, which rests on the physiology of consciousness — the arousal system
and the integrated thalamocortical networks — that anaesthetics depress through
their molecular actions on the GABA and glutamate systems;
and its monitoring rests on the electroencephalogram.
The relief of pain rests on the physiology of nociception and its modulation,
which dictates the multimodal analgesia acting along the pain pathway,
and the action of local anaesthetics on the nerves.
The control of movement and the use of neuromuscular blockade rest on the
physiology of the motor system and the neuromuscular junction.
The care of the brain at risk — in neurosurgery,
head injury and cardiac arrest — rests on the physiology of the cerebral
circulation, the intracranial pressure and cerebral metabolism,
which dictates cerebral protection and the management of intracranial pressure.
And the stability of the patient rests on the autonomic nervous system and its
reflexes.
So neurophysiology underpins the whole of anaesthesia:
the abolition and monitoring of consciousness, the relief of pain,
the control of movement, the protection of the brain at risk,
and the autonomic stability of the patient — the practice of anaesthesia being,
throughout, the application of the physiology of the nervous system,
the fitting conclusion to its study.
Summarise the effects of the anaesthetic agents on cerebral blood flow,
metabolism and intracranial pressure.
A summary of how the various anaesthetic agents affect the cerebral blood flow,
the cerebral metabolic rate and the intracranial pressure is of central practical
importance in neuro-anaesthesia, since it governs the choice of agent,
so it is worth setting out.
The agents fall into patterns.
The intravenous agents — propofol, the barbiturates and etomidate — reduce the
cerebral metabolic rate, and, through flow-metabolism coupling,
reduce the cerebral blood flow and blood volume in parallel,
while preserving autoregulation and carbon-dioxide reactivity;
so they tend to reduce the intracranial pressure and are generally favourable in
the patient with intracranial disease.
Ketamine is the exception among the intravenous agents,
tending to increase the cerebral metabolic rate,
blood flow and intracranial pressure.
The volatile inhalational agents have a dual effect:
they reduce the cerebral metabolic rate,
but they also directly dilate the cerebral vessels;
this direct vasodilatation tends to increase the cerebral blood flow,
blood volume and intracranial pressure, and to impair autoregulation,
the effect increasing with the concentration — so they are used cautiously in
intracranial disease, generally at lower concentrations.
Nitrous oxide tends to increase the cerebral blood flow,
metabolic rate and intracranial pressure. The opioids and neuromuscular blockers
have little direct effect.
So the intravenous agents except ketamine reduce cerebral metabolism, blood flow,
volume and intracranial pressure, favourably preserving autoregulation;
ketamine and nitrous oxide increase them; and the volatile agents,
while reducing metabolism, directly vasodilate the cerebral vessels,
tending to raise the cerebral blood volume and intracranial pressure and impair
autoregulation at higher concentrations — a summary governing the choice of agent
in neuro-anaesthesia.
Describe the physiology of the sitting position and venous air embolism.
The sitting position, used for certain neurosurgical procedures,
has particular physiological consequences,
the most dangerous being venous air embolism,
and an understanding of these follows from the physiology of the cerebral venous
drainage and the circulation, so it is worth describing.
The sitting, or head-up, position has advantages for some posterior cranial
surgery, including good surgical access and venous drainage. But it has hazards.
The elevation of the head above the heart lowers the pressure in the veins of the
head and neck, which may fall below atmospheric pressure;
so if a vein is opened during surgery and does not collapse — as the dural venous
sinuses, held open by their structure,
do not — air may be drawn into the venous system: venous air embolism.
The entrained air passes to the heart,
where it can impair the filling and pumping of the right heart and obstruct the
pulmonary circulation, causing a fall in cardiac output,
hypoxia and cardiovascular collapse; and,
if there is a communication between the right and left sides of the heart,
air may pass to the systemic and cerebral circulation — a paradoxical embolism.
The condition is detected by monitoring — a sensitive Doppler over the heart,
and a fall in the end-tidal carbon dioxide — and managed by stopping further entry,
aspirating air, and supporting the circulation.
The sitting position also tends to cause hypotension and reduces the cerebral
perfusion pressure.
So the sitting position lowers the venous pressure in the head,
risking venous air embolism if an open,
non-collapsing vein such as a dural sinus entrains air — the air impairing the
right heart and pulmonary circulation, causing collapse,
and possibly passing paradoxically to the brain;
detected by Doppler and a falling end-tidal carbon dioxide and managed by stopping
entry, aspirating air and supporting the circulation — hazards following from the
physiology of the cerebral venous drainage.
Describe the monitoring during carotid endarterectomy.
Carotid endarterectomy, in which the carotid artery is clamped while plaque is
removed, puts the brain at risk of ischaemia,
and the monitoring used to detect this follows from the physiology of the cerebral
circulation and its collateral supply, so it is worth describing.
During the operation, the carotid artery must be clamped,
temporarily interrupting a major supply to the brain.
Whether this causes cerebral ischaemia depends on the adequacy of the collateral
circulation — chiefly through the circle of Willis from the other vessels;
in many patients the collateral supply is sufficient, but in some it is not,
and the brain becomes ischaemic during clamping,
requiring a temporary shunt to be inserted to maintain the flow.
The monitoring aims to detect inadequate cerebral perfusion during clamping,
so that a shunt can be used when needed.
The methods reflect the physiology: the awake patient, under regional anaesthesia,
can be assessed directly by their neurological function and conscious state — the
most direct monitor; under general anaesthesia,
surrogates are used — the electroencephalogram,
which slows or flattens with ischaemia;
the cerebral oximetry and the stump pressure, reflecting the collateral perfusion;
and transcranial Doppler, reflecting the flow velocity.
So carotid endarterectomy risks cerebral ischaemia during the clamping of the
carotid, the risk depending on the collateral circulation through the circle of
Willis; the monitoring detects inadequate perfusion so that a shunt can be used —
by the neurological assessment of the awake patient, or, under general anaesthesia,
by the electroencephalogram, cerebral oximetry,
stump pressure and transcranial Doppler — monitoring following from the physiology
of the cerebral circulation and its collateral supply.
Describe the protection of the spinal cord during aortic surgery.
Surgery on the aorta, particularly the thoracic and thoracoabdominal aorta,
puts the spinal cord at risk of ischaemia,
and the measures to protect it follow from the physiology of the cord's blood
supply and of cerebral and spinal protection, so they are worth describing.
The blood supply to the spinal cord, particularly in the thoracic region,
is precarious, depending on segmental arteries arising from the aorta;
surgery that involves clamping the aorta or sacrificing these segmental arteries
can interrupt the supply to the cord,
risking ischaemia and the catastrophic complication of paraplegia.
The protection of the cord rests on principles analogous to those of cerebral
protection, applied to this precarious supply.
The perfusion of the cord is maintained or improved:
by maintaining an adequate blood pressure,
and — importantly — by lowering the pressure of the cerebrospinal fluid by
drainage, since the perfusion pressure of the cord is the arterial pressure minus
the cerebrospinal fluid pressure, so draining the fluid improves perfusion.
The reattachment of critical segmental arteries preserves the supply.
The demand is reduced by hypothermia,
protecting the cord during the period of compromised supply.
The cord function is monitored by the evoked potentials — the motor and
somatosensory potentials — to detect ischaemia in time to act.
So the spinal cord is at risk during aortic surgery from interruption of its
precarious segmental blood supply, risking paraplegia;
protected by maintaining its perfusion — supporting the arterial pressure and
draining the cerebrospinal fluid to raise the perfusion pressure — by preserving
critical segmental arteries, by reducing demand with hypothermia,
and by monitoring with evoked potentials — protection following from the physiology
of the cord's blood supply and of cerebral and spinal protection.
Describe the ventilation targets in the brain-injured patient.
The management of ventilation in the patient with a brain injury is guided by the
effects of the arterial carbon dioxide and oxygen on the cerebral circulation,
and getting these targets right is important, so they are worth setting out.
The arterial carbon dioxide is the key consideration,
because of its powerful effect on the cerebral blood flow and volume.
Hypercapnia must be avoided, since a raised carbon dioxide dilates the cerebral
vessels, increasing the cerebral blood volume and the intracranial pressure —
harmful in the injured brain.
The carbon dioxide is therefore generally kept in the normal-to-low-normal range,
and controlled ventilation is used to achieve this.
Hypocapnia, by constricting the cerebral vessels,
reduces the cerebral blood flow and volume and so can lower a raised intracranial
pressure — and modest hypocapnia may be used acutely for this purpose — but
excessive or prolonged hypocapnia is harmful,
because the marked vasoconstriction can reduce the cerebral blood flow to ischaemic
levels in an already-compromised brain;
so aggressive routine hyperventilation is avoided,
reserved as a temporary measure for acutely raised pressure.
The oxygen must be kept adequate, since hypoxia is a powerful secondary insult,
dilating the cerebral vessels and directly injuring the brain;
so hypoxia is rigorously avoided and an adequate arterial oxygen maintained.
So in the brain-injured patient, the ventilation is managed to keep the arterial
carbon dioxide in the normal-to-low-normal range, avoiding hypercapnia,
which raises the intracranial pressure, and avoiding excessive hypocapnia,
which risks ischaemia — modest hyperventilation reserved as a temporary measure for
raised pressure — while rigorously avoiding hypoxia;
ventilation targets following from the effects of carbon dioxide and oxygen on the
cerebral circulation.
Describe the importance of glycaemic control for the injured brain.
The control of the blood glucose is important in the patient with a brain injury or
at risk of cerebral ischaemia, because both high and low glucose are harmful to the
brain, and an understanding of this follows from cerebral metabolism,
so it is worth describing.
The brain depends almost entirely on glucose for its energy,
so its supply must be maintained; but in the context of injury and ischaemia,
both extremes of blood glucose are harmful.
Hypoglycaemia is dangerous because the brain, with no glucose store,
depends on a continuous supply; a low blood glucose deprives it of its substrate,
impairing its function and, if severe,
causing injury — so hypoglycaemia must be avoided.
Hyperglycaemia is also harmful to the injured or ischaemic brain:
a high blood glucose worsens ischaemic neuronal injury,
because the excess glucose delivered to the ischaemic tissue,
metabolised anaerobically when the oxygen supply is inadequate,
produces excess lactic acid, worsening the tissue acidosis and the injury;
so a raised blood glucose is associated with worse outcomes after cerebral
ischaemia and injury.
The aim is therefore to maintain the blood glucose within a normal range — avoiding
hypoglycaemia, which starves the brain, and hyperglycaemia,
which worsens ischaemic injury — by monitoring and controlling it,
while avoiding the overly-tight control that risks hypoglycaemia.
So glycaemic control matters for the injured brain because hypoglycaemia starves
the glucose-dependent brain of its substrate,
while hyperglycaemia worsens ischaemic injury by increasing the anaerobic
production of lactic acid in the ischaemic tissue;
so the blood glucose is kept in the normal range,
avoiding both extremes — an application of cerebral metabolism to the protection of
the injured brain.
Describe therapeutic hypothermia and temperature management for the brain.
The management of temperature is an important aspect of protecting the brain,
since temperature has a powerful effect on the cerebral metabolic rate,
and both the avoidance of hyperthermia and the use of therapeutic hypothermia
follow from this, so they are worth describing.
The basis is the strong effect of temperature on the cerebral metabolic rate,
which falls by around five to seven per cent for each degree of cooling.
Two applications follow.
First, the avoidance of hyperthermia:
fever and a raised temperature increase the cerebral metabolic rate and worsen
ischaemic and other brain injury, so hyperthermia is harmful to the injured brain
and is rigorously avoided and treated — maintaining normothermia is an important
and effective protective measure.
Second, therapeutic hypothermia: deliberately cooling the body, and so the brain,
reduces the cerebral metabolic rate and increases the brain's tolerance of reduced
blood flow, and so has been used to protect the brain in situations of ischaemic
risk.
Deep hypothermia is used to protect the brain during procedures requiring the
circulation to be arrested.
Milder, targeted temperature management has been used after cardiac arrest and
other insults, to protect the brain,
though the optimal targets and the benefit have been much debated,
and current practice emphasises at least the strict avoidance of fever.
So temperature management protects the brain through the effect of temperature on
the cerebral metabolic rate: hyperthermia,
which increases metabolism and worsens injury,
is rigorously avoided and normothermia maintained; while therapeutic hypothermia,
reducing the metabolic rate and increasing the tolerance of ischaemia,
is used for cerebral protection — deep hypothermia during circulatory arrest,
and milder targeted temperature management after cardiac arrest,
with the avoidance of fever emphasised — following from the effect of temperature
on cerebral metabolism.
Describe the perioperative management of seizures.
Seizures may occur in the perioperative period,
and they are harmful to the brain and a sign of serious problems,
so an understanding of their causes and management is worth having,
following from the physiology of seizures and cerebral metabolism.
A seizure is an episode of abnormal, excessive, synchronised neuronal activity.
Perioperatively, seizures may arise in patients with epilepsy,
from the underlying brain disease being operated upon,
or from metabolic and other disturbances — such as hypoxia, hypoglycaemia,
electrolyte disturbances, certain drugs, and local anaesthetic toxicity.
They are harmful: the intense neuronal activity greatly increases the cerebral
metabolic rate, and if it outstrips the blood supply, the neurons may be injured;
a prolonged seizure — status epilepticus — is dangerous and can cause lasting brain
injury, besides the systemic effects of the convulsion.
The management is to terminate the seizure and to treat the cause.
The seizure is terminated with drugs that enhance inhibition — the benzodiazepines
being the first-line agents — and, if it continues, with further anticonvulsants,
and ultimately by anaesthesia, since the general anaesthetic agents,
suppressing neuronal activity, terminate seizures.
Throughout, the airway, breathing and circulation are supported,
and the oxygenation maintained, and the cause — such as hypoxia,
hypoglycaemia or local anaesthetic toxicity — is sought and treated.
So perioperative seizures, arising from epilepsy,
brain disease or metabolic and toxic disturbances,
are harmful — increasing the cerebral metabolic rate and, if prolonged,
injuring the brain; managed by terminating the seizure with benzodiazepines and,
if needed, further anticonvulsants and anaesthesia,
while supporting oxygenation and treating the cause — following from the physiology
of seizures and cerebral metabolism.
Describe the physiology underlying the diagnosis of brainstem death.
The diagnosis of death by neurological criteria — brainstem death — rests on the
physiology of the brainstem and its central role in the vital functions and in
consciousness, and an understanding of this underlies the principles of its
testing, so it is worth describing.
The concept is that death may be diagnosed by the irreversible loss of the
functions of the brainstem, because the brainstem is essential both to
consciousness — through the ascending arousal system that passes through it — and
to the vital functions, particularly the control of breathing,
whose centres lie in the brainstem;
so the irreversible loss of all brainstem function means the irreversible loss of
the capacity for consciousness and for spontaneous breathing, and hence death.
The testing, conducted under strict preconditions — a known,
irreversible cause of catastrophic brain injury,
and the exclusion of reversible causes such as drugs,
hypothermia and metabolic disturbances that could mimic the state — demonstrates
the absence of all brainstem function.
This is shown by the absence of the brainstem reflexes — the pupillary, corneal,
vestibulo-ocular, gag and others, each testing a level of the brainstem — and,
crucially, by the apnoea test, which demonstrates the absence of any spontaneous
breathing despite a carbon dioxide rise sufficient to stimulate the respiratory
centre, confirming the loss of the respiratory centre's function.
So the diagnosis of brainstem death rests on the brainstem's essential role in
consciousness, through the ascending arousal system,
and in the vital function of breathing; its irreversible loss being demonstrated,
under strict preconditions excluding reversible causes,
by the absence of all the brainstem reflexes and by the apnoea test showing no
breathing despite an adequate carbon dioxide stimulus — the physiology underlying
the diagnosis of death by neurological criteria.
Describe the monitoring of neuromuscular blockade.
The neuromuscular blockade used in anaesthesia must be monitored,
both to guide its use and to ensure its complete reversal,
and the monitoring follows from the physiology of the neuromuscular junction,
so it is worth describing.
The neuromuscular blocking drugs act at the neuromuscular junction,
and their effect — the degree of block — must be assessed,
because it varies between patients and over time,
and because residual block at the end of anaesthesia is dangerous,
impairing breathing and airway protection.
The monitoring is done by stimulating a motor nerve electrically and observing the
resulting muscle contraction, the response reflecting the degree of block.
The standard method is the train-of-four:
four stimuli are applied in quick succession, and the muscle responses observed;
as a non-depolarising block deepens,
the responses are progressively reduced and the later ones fade relative to the
first — the fade reflecting the block;
the number of responses and the ratio of the fourth to the first indicate the depth
of block.
Recovery is shown by the return of the responses and the abolition of the fade.
Adequate recovery, confirmed before the end of anaesthesia,
requires the restoration of the responses to a defined degree,
ensuring that the block is sufficiently reversed for safe breathing and airway
protection.
So neuromuscular blockade is monitored by electrically stimulating a motor nerve
and observing the muscle response, which reflects the degree of block at the
neuromuscular junction; the train-of-four method showing the reduction and fade of
the responses with block and their recovery as it wears off — used to guide the
blockade and, crucially, to confirm its adequate reversal before the end of
anaesthesia — monitoring following from the physiology of the neuromuscular
junction.
Describe local anaesthetic systemic toxicity and its effects on the central nervous
system.
Local anaesthetic systemic toxicity is an important complication of the use of
local anaesthetics, and its effects on the central nervous system and the heart,
and its physiology, are worth understanding,
since it is a recognised emergency in anaesthesia.
Local anaesthetics act by blocking the sodium channels and so the conduction of
impulses in nerves; this is their intended action on the peripheral nerves,
but if a sufficient amount reaches the systemic circulation — by inadvertent
intravascular injection or by absorption of an excessive dose — they block the
sodium channels in the excitable tissues of the central nervous system and the
heart, causing toxicity.
The central nervous system effects come first, as it is more sensitive.
Initially, there are excitatory features — because the local anaesthetic first
depresses the inhibitory neurons, disinhibiting the rest — with symptoms such as a
metallic taste, tingling around the mouth, light-headedness,
visual and auditory disturbance, and agitation,
progressing to muscle twitching and then convulsions.
With higher concentrations, the excitation gives way to depression — a general
depression of the central nervous system, with loss of consciousness,
and depression of breathing.
The cardiovascular toxicity — depression of the heart and the circulation,
with arrhythmias and, in severe cases,
cardiovascular collapse — occurs at higher concentrations and is the most
dangerous. The treatment is supportive, with the additional use of lipid emulsion.
So local anaesthetic systemic toxicity arises when an excessive amount reaches the
circulation, blocking sodium channels in the central nervous system and heart;
the central effects coming first — initial excitation,
from the disinhibition of inhibitory neurons, with tingling,
agitation and convulsions, progressing to depression and unconsciousness —
followed, at higher levels, by the dangerous cardiovascular depression and
collapse; treated supportively and with lipid emulsion — a recognised anaesthetic
emergency.
Describe postoperative cognitive dysfunction and delirium.
Disturbances of cognition after surgery and anaesthesia — postoperative delirium
and postoperative cognitive dysfunction — are common and important,
particularly in the elderly, and an understanding of them is worth having,
as they affect outcome and are a focus of concern.
These are two related but distinct disturbances of brain function after surgery.
Postoperative delirium is an acute, fluctuating disturbance of consciousness,
attention and cognition, developing in the hours to days after surgery;
the patient is confused, inattentive and disorientated, sometimes agitated or,
conversely, quietly withdrawn, with the disturbance fluctuating.
It is common, especially in the elderly and the already-vulnerable,
and is associated with worse outcomes.
Its causes are multiple — the effects of the surgery and its inflammatory response,
drugs including sedatives and those with antimuscarinic actions, pain,
metabolic disturbances, infection, and the disruption of sleep and the environment.
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction is a more subtle and prolonged impairment of
cognitive functions — memory, concentration and others — detectable on testing for
weeks or longer after surgery, again most common in the elderly.
The precise contributions of the anaesthesia,
the surgery and the underlying state are debated.
The prevention and management rest on attention to the multiple contributing
factors — avoiding precipitating drugs, treating pain appropriately,
maintaining orientation and sleep, and treating the medical causes.
So postoperative delirium is an acute,
fluctuating disturbance of consciousness and cognition after surgery,
common in the elderly and multifactorial;
and postoperative cognitive dysfunction is a more prolonged,
subtle cognitive impairment; both important for outcome,
their prevention resting on attention to the contributing factors — drugs, pain,
sleep, orientation and medical causes — important disturbances of brain function
after surgery.
Describe the neuroendocrine stress response to surgery and its central control.
Surgery provokes a coordinated neuroendocrine stress response,
controlled centrally by the brain, and an understanding of this,
and of its central control, is worth having,
as it draws together the autonomic and endocrine responses and is modified by
anaesthesia.
Surgery and injury provoke a stereotyped response that mobilises the body to cope
with the insult — the stress response — comprising neural, endocrine,
metabolic and immune components.
It is controlled centrally, the brain — particularly the hypothalamus —
coordinating it in response to the signals from the site of injury,
carried by the nerves, and to the other stimuli of surgery.
The response has two great arms.
The neural arm is the activation of the sympathetic nervous system and the adrenal
medulla, producing the cardiovascular and metabolic effects of the catecholamines —
the increase in heart rate and blood pressure, and the mobilisation of energy.
The endocrine arm is the activation, by the hypothalamus,
of the secretion of the stress hormones — chiefly through the pituitary,
the secretion of cortisol from the adrenal cortex,
and of other hormones — producing the metabolic responses,
including the mobilisation of energy substrates, the retention of salt and water,
and effects on the immune system.
The overall effect is catabolic and mobilising.
Anaesthesia and analgesia modify this response:
by blocking the afferent signals — particularly regional anaesthesia,
which can block the neural pathway from the site — and by other effects,
anaesthesia can attenuate the stress response.
So surgery provokes a neuroendocrine stress response,
controlled centrally by the hypothalamus in response to the neural signals from the
injury: a neural arm — sympathetic and adrenal medullary activation,
with the catecholamine effects — and an endocrine arm — the secretion of cortisol
and other stress hormones — producing a mobilising, catabolic response;
modified by anaesthesia and especially regional techniques that block the afferent
signals — a response drawing together the autonomic and endocrine systems under
central control.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Neuromonitoring detects impending nervous-system injury in time to act:
the EEG detects cortical ischaemia (e.g.
carotid surgery); evoked potentials test the integrity of specific pathways;
and oxygenation/perfusion monitors (jugular venous oximetry,
near-infrared cerebral oximetry, transcranial Doppler) detect inadequate cerebral
blood flow.
Second, Evoked potentials test a pathway by stimulating at one point and recording
the transmitted response: somatosensory evoked potentials test the ascending
sensory pathway (dorsal columns), motor evoked potentials the descending
corticospinal tract — used in spinal surgery (the two pathways lie separately in
the cord and may be injured independently); both are affected by anaesthetic agents.
Third, Cerebral protection: maintain supply (adequate cerebral perfusion pressure,
oxygenation, carrying capacity) and reduce demand (hypothermia — most effective,
reducing functional AND basal metabolism;
metabolic-suppressant anaesthetics like barbiturates/propofol help in focal
ischaemia); rigorously avoid secondary insults (hypoxia, hypotension, hypercapnia,
hyperthermia, glycaemic disturbance, seizures).
Fourth, The patient with raised ICP:
avoid raising it (control ventilation to avoid hypercapnia/hypoxia,
head-up positioning for venous drainage,
prevent coughing/straining/laryngoscopy surges,
favour IV agents that reduce cerebral blood volume,
use volatiles cautiously) while maintaining cerebral perfusion pressure (support
arterial pressure).
Accidental awareness occurs when depth is insufficient — worsened by neuromuscular
blockade and pain; prevented by adequate dosing, end-tidal agent monitoring,
vigilance for light-anaesthesia signs, and depth monitors.
Fifth, Autonomic disturbances relevant to anaesthesia: autonomic neuropathy (e.g.
diabetes) impairs compensatory reflexes → cardiovascular instability;
autonomic dysreflexia (high spinal injury) → dangerous hypertension from
uncontrolled sympathetic discharge below the lesion;
and anaesthesia depresses autonomic reflexes (baroreflex).
Anaesthesia is, in essence, applied neurophysiology — underpinning the
abolition/monitoring of consciousness, analgesia, motor control,
brain protection and autonomic stability.
Thank you. That concludes the station.